I want to thank you all uh as Alan said
coming out on a Thursday evening to hear
some of the things that I'll tell you
about cancer as he I'm a professor at
Boston College I teach Advanced biology
especially related to cancer and some
and some general biology as well um and
that's what basically uh what my
profession is I'm a professor but we do
a lot of research basic research on
cancer we've developed some of the best
preclinical models that we can test and
and vet variety of different approaches
and then I work with a number of
Physicians who are anxious to adapt what
we're doing because my view on cancer is
I think we need to vet these things
clearly in models that replicate exactly
what goes on in the human disease so
we're sure of two things number one is
what we're planning to do work and does
it not harm the subject because if we're
if we're able to get the disease managed
without harming the subject maybe we can
now adapt this for the human and we're
starting to see some successes what I
just did was I took the the data from
the American Cancer Society and we just
cases per year new cases debts and debts
per day and we go from 90 to that last
26 years and you know some people say oh
do we see a lot of good news in these
numbers um the good news is that the
number of people dying per day the
increase for those 26 years is not as is
not as uh uh dramatic as the number of
new cases so the new cases are flooding
into the system uh and not only in the
United States this is happening in all
all countries throughout the world um
and in China China is just devastated by
cancer more so than many other countries
um so the good news is is that the the
the rate of deaths the body count is not
increasing as rapidly as the new the new
people coming into the and they say well
we're making head roads and then of
course every now and then on the news
you're going to hear major breakthroughs
in cancer um uh that we're seeing that
for the first time the death rate is
going down and you'll see a couple of
those of those um uh situations where it
dropped here a little bit and then you
say oh we're making major but then the
next year it goes back up again and it's
this constant increase so you have to
say to yourselves you know what what is
going on here how is it possible that
our country and so many other countries
are spending so much money on this
disease and yet the progress in managing
the disease is in my mind uh not nearly
what we we think it should be and it
seems like we've been we've become
complacent that cancer is just something
we're going to have to live with and
we're going to have to suffer with
because it's part of of of our
technological societies and I'm saying
no that's not necessarily the case so we
have to then look what I what I what I
have to do is I have to introduce you to
the what we think cancer is because I
think what we think cancer answer is
currently by The Establishment the
pharmaceutical the academic Industries
the federal government um may not be
correct and I'm going to present
evidence and let you uh look at some of
the evidence that we we have uh um
accumulated here okay so the question is
provocative question is cancer a nuclear
genetic disease or is it a mitochondrial
metabolic disease very very different
very different uh aspects of this
because this is the cell and we know
that these cells grow out of control and
uh this is a the nucleus of the cell now
according to the current view the DNA
right here in the nucleus becomes
damaged and that's what sends these
tumor cells into uh uncontrolled growth
the other problem the other aspect here
is it a these little bean-shaped organel
that are in the cell they're called
mitochondria and they're the organel
that generate the energy for our cells
they they're responsible for our
respiration so the question is is cancer
a genetic involving the nucleus as the
primary driver of the disease the
mutations in the nucleus or is it
possible that it's these little organel
in the cytoplasm outside of the nucleus
that might be the real culprits on this
and this is the focus of the first part
of what I'll be talking about just so
you have an idea of what the balance
what we're really talking about here
okay so the current Dogma is cancer is a
genetic disease in this paper by
Hallmark's Next Generation a very uh
commonly cided paper it pretty much sets
the whole playing field of what the
nature of this disease is is cancer
cells carry the oncogenic and tumor
suppressor mutations that Define cancer
as a genetic disease now we call it a
Dogma uh a Dogma is an irrefutable truth
a Dogma is something that's no longer
questioned a Dogma is something that now
is the way it is we have dealt with all
the other issues this is the way it is
and uh we're going to work within within
this mindset which Li leads to an
ideology now uh I say it's a Dogma
because I told you I teach biology and
biochemistry and genetics at Boston
College and any of the textbooks that
you open up in the section on cancer
first thing cancer is a genetic disease
caused by enogen and tumor suppressor
genes which I'll go over so this is the
where it is and and this information um
is not questioned there's no other
alternative you see you're reading the
books the kids all memorize so we have
indoctrinated several generations of uh
of scientists and Physicians through our
educational process and therefore the
research and the approaches to this
disease come based on the Dogma now
here's an example that they use in the
textbooks uh to illustrate this the car
uh the the Dogma is based platformed on
the somatic mutation theory of cancer in
my book I go through a very detailed
explanation of all this basically
mutations and genes inhibit or stimulate
cell division and contribute to cancer
so here's a group of cells they're
growing out of control and this is what
we call cancer it's a bunch of cells in
the body that and I'll talk about how
they spread and all this other stuff Med
metastasis but they use this car the car
is out of control it's going as fast as
it can it it has no brakes and this is
to represent these cells there's no
longer any growth regulation the cells
are growing like crazy because they have
no inhibitor inhibitor genes and the
genes that stimulate growth are are out
of
control so um now the the research
industry and our attempt to understand
and manage this disease is based on
these Hall marks and these are the hallm
marks that are outlined by by Doug
Hanahan and and and Robert Weinberg at
at uh who's at MIT um now here
sustaining proliferation evading growth
suppressors activating Invasion and
metastasis enabling replicative
immortality inducing angiogenesis which
is the blood vessels that go into the
tumor cells and resisting cell death now
you have to realize each one of these
Hallmarks is the subject of
multi-billion dollar Industries okay we
have pharmaceutical and academic uh
hospitals and Labs focusing on on one or
sever of these aspects the so-called
Hallmarks the concept of course is that
if we can understand the mechanisms of
these Hallmarks we can then provide
better therapies for managing the
disease now some emerging Hallmarks that
have come out in the last couple of
years avoiding immune destruction tumor
promoting inflammation genomic
instability and disregulated cell
energetics which I'm showing you right
here and I'll be focusing on this
so-called emerging Hallmark um because I
don't think it's the emerging Hallmark I
think it is the origin and I'll show you
evidence for that now to preserve the
Dogma if you read these books and these
papers these scientific papers very
carefully they recognize this as an
emerging Hallmark but they say
disregulated cell energetics is now an
emerging Hallmark that is programmed by
proliferating inducing enogen this
concept preserves the Dogma so the Dogma
everything has to do with the nuclear
gene mutations and that's the origin of
the disease so whatever you want to look
at any one of these Hallmarks or any of
these differences it's got to be based
on the fundamental issue of the Dogma
which is the somatic mutation theory of
cancer so what what that means is that
your cancers wherever it comes breast
colon brain lung starts with a mutation
and then one mutation here in a series
of chromosomes here's a normal cell
another mutation another over time
something this this that or that you get
a certain number of mutations and bang
you get this dismorphic malignant cell
so it goes from a normal epithelial cell
to a malignant this is called epithelial
meenal transition this is an epithelial
this is a dysmorphic cancer cell which
arose as the result of an accumulation
of these different kinds of mutations
the problem of course is that no one's
really sure how many mutations it takes
to get from here to here it could be
four it could be 20 it could be a
thousand we're now recognizing that
there could be millions of mutations
present in these cancer cells some are
considered drivers some are considered
passengers some are considered partial
drivers backseat dri drivers there there
there's all kinds of different kinds of
names that we're calling these different
kinds of mutations that are to are
thought to be driving and producing the
disease so then as the result of this
dogma and mindset we now have what we
call personalized therapy and you'll
hear this advertised at least up in
Boston at the Dana Farber and you'll
hear it from uh Cancer Center Treatment
Centers of America you'll hear about
we're going to use genomic testing to
see whether or not your um uh your
cancer can be can be treated or managed
or something like this and this woman is
staring into the screen looking at uh
information uh with extra copies or
genes or whatever and then she's going
to make a decision and say does this
information help us in prognosis or do
you think we can use this information as
the result of of a therapy and the major
medical schools are building big
departments uh that are breaking down
that using the genomic information you
hear it all over this is based this is
the Dogma this is the cancer is a
genetic disease based on somatic
mutations and the way we're going to
manage this disease is we're going to
better understand these mutations work
to produce the
disease okay the singular most important
aspect of the disease is metastasis
because ultimately metastasis is what is
most difficult to control and ultimately
leads the disease itself or our attempts
to manage the disease leads to the death
of majority of people with cancer so the
interesting thing and this is a a a
diagram or a picture the green cells are
the tumor cells and they go through this
stereotypical Cascade metastatic Cascade
the interesting thing about the
metastatic Cascade is that it's a very
stereotype whether you have lung cancer
uh colon cancer bladder cancer breast
cancer these cancer cells go through a
very stereotypic process uh local
Invasion so the cells break through
their normal barrier in intravasation
which means they enter into the
bloodstream this is a very sophisticated
biological process you can't believe the
the number of reactions that require
cells to that are not supposed to be in
the bloodstream to get into the
bloodstream they have IM system survival
the immune system doesn't attack attack
them they're immunosuppressive and some
of these new drugs you hear about these
checkpoint Inhibitors and all this
they're they're designed to try to make
them more imuno responsive uh in
extravasation so these tumor cells here
in the bloodstream they they leave the
bloodstream and they enter into
different organs or different systems at
at distant places this is called
extravasation and secondary tumor
formation and it happens when you start
your body starts to collect tumor cells
you can no longer use surgery you can no
longer use radiation you have to then
fall back on these new so-called
immunotherapies and these new tox old
toxic drugs and whatever you want to do
you're trying to you're trying to
cleanse your body of these metastatic
cancer cells and then you hear all the
time well they reverted we weren't
successful they're coming back the
sances are very tough they're doing this
and they're doing that and everybody
seems to be okay with that now the qu
one of the questions is how can the
accumulation of random somatic mutations
cause a non-random metastatic Cascade
based on this epithelial meenal
transmiss nobody dis nobody discusses
that it's just one of those things we
don't discuss so I put this picture up
here the Dilemma The Dilemma that we
have how can we advance new therapies
for cancer management and prevention if
the 800 pound gorilla thinks cancer is a
genetic disease and Dogma rules so who
is the gorilla who's this gorilla that's
that's telling us it's the National
Cancer Institute go to their website see
what they say on the national cancer
cancer is a genetic disease uh the AC
mic industry the academic inform the top
labs in the top medical schools are
locked into the dogma and the the
pharmaceutical Industries the big Labs
the pharmaceutical Industries the
National Cancer Institute they this is
the Dogma they are uh of the view they
are of the view that cancer is a nuclear
genetic disease therefore all of the
things that we're doing the majority of
things we're doing are related in one
way to the or the other to that the
sematic mutation Theory and the do
so let me present evidence that
challenges the sematic mutation theory
of cancer and again I when I present
this some people don't want to see it
they don't want to talk about it they
don't want to hear it so uh but anyway
I'll proceed with it
anyway um now one of the most
interesting studies that was done by
done by um mckinnel and his group and I
had a chance to speak to him is
professor emeritus at the University of
Minnesota and he did this study and
published a top Journal science
1969 and what he did there's a there's a
form of tumor in the in the Frog it's
the luck tumor it's a renal very deadly
rapidly growing malignant tumor in the
kidney of the Frog so he took the cells
out of the Frog kidney here here's the
cell from the tumor cell the tumor cell
and he removed the nucleus of the tumor
cell that supposedly has the mutations
that cause the disease and then he put
that nucleus into a fertilized egg and
removed the the natural nucleus and put
the tumor nucleus into this new
cytoplasm that contain normal
mitochondria and then you have this now
new egg and this egg developed into this
tadpole that's shown right here and he
evaluated the tadpole there was no
abnormal abnormal cell growth there was
no dysmorphic there was no tumors there
was nothing that you would call cancer
yet it came from this rapidly growing
malignant tumor the interesting thing
about this study is that this tadpole
for whatever reason there was something
in the nucleus of the tumor cell that
prevented the tadpole from maturing into
an adult frog so there was something
definite so with some problem but the
findings are inconsistent with the
sematic mutation Theory which says that
the genes in the nucleus are responsible
for the abnormal cell growth there was
another study done by beerus minz at at
um uh in in Philadelphia at Thomas
Jefferson beer and carmeni and they they
have a a malignant teratoma which is
very rapidly growing kind of an embryoid
kind of tumor and they took this the
whole cell out of that and they put it
into a blastocyst of a mouse and they
cloned a mouse mouse that contained part
tumor cells part cells from the teratoma
and part normal cells and yet and yet
the mouse had no cancer and they were
able to show that these tumor cells were
not forming cancer in this in this mouse
so their conclusion was conversion to
neoplasia which is this abnormal cell
growth does not involve structural
changes in the nuclear genome what does
that mean this is not consistent with
what we're told in the somatic mutation
Theory wasn't wasn't discussed so this
was another study that was done by Jim
Morgan and his group at St Jude's
Hospital in Memphis Tennessee they
cloned Mouse embryos from the nuclei of
meul blastoma this is a kind of a brain
tumor in the cerebellum so they took the
nucleus out of the the brain tumor and
they put it into a a stem into a um a
stem cell and they cloned this mouse
this is an embryoid M Mouse but the
ectoderm mism and endoderm were all in
their normal configurations now the
interesting thing although the Meelo
embryos aborted none exhibited
uncontrolled proliferation resembling
tumorogenesis how is it possible that if
the mut sematic mutation theory of of
the of the cause of the disease is in
the nucleus controlling the
proliferation of the cells we take that
nucleus and put it into a new cytoplasm
we don't get that phenotype these
findings are inconsistent with the
sematic mutation theory of cancer Rudy
Anish at MIT and his group did another
study Rudy is a very interesting guy
he's the leader in in mamalian
developmental bi biology he is he is the
Premier mamalian developmental biologist
he saw those other studies and he said I
don't believe those other studies until
I can do it myself with my system at MIT
so he took melanoma cells and he from a
Mel a mouse melanoma and he
characterized the kinds of mutations
that were in the nucleus of the melanoma
then he took the nucleus out of the
melanoma cells and again put it into an
embryonic stem cell and cloned these
mice this is one of them here from the
nucleus of the melanoma and he found the
same mutations that were in this mouse
embryo that were present in the original
melanoma but this Mouse had no cancer it
wasn't it wasn't producing the phenotype
that we would call
neoplasia so he says here the presence
of the major genetic abnormalities in
Embry clone from the tumor provides
unequivocal genomic evidence that these
mice were cloned from the tumor nucleus
yet they did not present the phenotype
that would be expected based on the
dogma and the sematic mutation Theory
inconsistent this was a more recent stud
done by Benny at at at Vera College of
Medicine Benny KATU in his group and
what he said what he did he took very
aggressive uh breast human breast cancer
U metastatic breast cancer cells and
what he did is he's he has this even
harder technology he removed the
cytoplasm containing the abnormal
mitochondria and put normal mitochondria
with the still the metastatic nucleus
and before he did that he characterized
all these abnormal enogen the ones that
are supposedly driving the disease and
in the melanoma they had very high
enogen and when he took and put normal
mitochondria into this into this breast
cancer cell the cell stopped growing and
the enogen turned off which was very
like what's going on here in other words
the enogen are being controlled by the
mitochondria in the cytoplasm which is
like completely different from the
sematic mutation Theory so what I did
last summer I finally after years I put
it in my book and then I extended it
recently um I I brought together all of
these observ I only gave you a snapshot
because I don't have time to go through
all these experiments the the uh but
they're all in they're all in this paper
and they're in my book so what I did as
I said okay we have we have we have two
fundamental explanations for the origin
of cancer we have two fundamental
explanations one is the sematic mutation
Theory and the other is it's not in the
nucleus it's in the cytoplasm and the
mitochondria let's compare and contrast
the observations from all these
different kinds of studies and see what
the results and so I tell people if
you're interested in knowing the
argument read the paper make your own
decision don't just listen to me look at
the original papers read them for elv I
know there sometimes they can be
somewhat technical but that will you
know you weigh and you compare and you
contrast and then as a the rational mind
will look at the information and say hey
I I I think it's this way or that way so
this summarizes what I just said in a
very simple cartoon um normal cells to
get normal cells tumor cells beget tumor
cells we know this okay what is
responsible for the dysplastic cell
growth and the abnormal growth of these
tumor cells is it the nuclear mutations
is it the mutations in the nucleus like
the dog says or is it the defects in the
cytoplasm the mitochondria okay it was
tested so you move this nucleus into a
new cytoplasm with normal mitochondria
and you got normal cells sometimes
normal tissue and sometimes a normal
Mouse and if you move the normal nucleus
into the tumor cytoplasm you got either
dead cells or tumor cells you never got
normal cells this is just the opposite
of what you would expect if cancer were
a nuclear genetic disease so this is
very hard information for the for the
for indoctrinated people
to swallow this is very hard information
to swallow all right again I don't want
to hear it I don't want to talk about it
okay so if sematic mutations are not the
origin of cancer then where do these
cells come from how do we get cancer if
mutations in the nucleus are not the
cause of the
disease so warberg had this disease
pegged a long time ago a famous German
scientist from the 1920s um did his work
in the 20s and 30s 40s and 50s uh
basically warberg said cancer arises
from damage to the cellular respiration
in cells energy through fermentation
which is a primitive form of energy uh
gradually compensates for insufficient
respiration cancer cells continue to
ferment lactic acid or lactate in the
presence of oxygen this is called the
warberg effect you see we shouldn't be
fermenting if oxygen is present it's
called the pastur effect these are very
complicated phenomena if you put yeast
cells in no oxygen they throw out lactic
acid they begin to ferment okay but if
you bring oxygen in they stop fermenting
and they start to breathe respiration is
breathing cancer cells continue to
ferment even when oxygen is present so
this is this is an aberration this is an
abnormal thing all cancer cells to one
degree or another are fermenters all
right so then the enhanced fermentation
is the signature metabolic malady of all
cancer cells so when we look at cancer
from the genomic at Atlas the cancer
genome Atlas we take someone's tumor and
we spend a lot of money fragmenting
thousands and thousands of mutations and
cataloging all of these mutations and
what we find is that every cell in the
tumor has a different constellation of
mutations so the goal of the
personalized medicine is essentially to
try to Target different kinds of
Pathways from these mut mutate mutated
cells to try to manage the disease but
every cell has so many different kinds
of mutations how are you going to build
a cocktail of of targets when every cell
is different and they all have
constellation this is the Strate this is
called personalized medicine which is
being done today now that's one okay
that's what I just
said is it just think for a minute do
you think that's the wise strategy now
if every cell in that tumor is
fermenting to some degree regardless of
what the nuclear mutations are and we
know what the fuels are that these cells
are using to ferment doesn't it make
sense that you might want
to uh deprive those cells of those fuels
they're using to ferment when all of
them are doing the same thing to one
form or
another why are we not doing
that so when we talk about
respiration not it's what is respiration
we breathe air we're sitting here right
now tonight we're breathing right
nobody's F fermenting even if you're
falling asleep you're not going to be
fermenting you're still going to be
breathing so we breathe in air and we
exhale all right what we breathe in
oxygen and the waste products of
fermentation are basically carbon
dioxide from the foods that we ate and
water that's the waste product all right
and we get most of our energy by
breathing we breathe and we get very
little energy by primitive fermentation
processes this um uh glycolysis in the
cytoplasm and we get a little
fermentation energy from the kreb cycle
the TCA Tri tricarboxylic acid cycle so
you can see 5% 5% most of our energy
comes from breathing we breathe in Air
oxygen oxygen is what's keeping us going
the cancer cell is very different the
cancer cell gets a lot of its energy
from these more primitive forms these
primitive fermentation processes existed
on the planet before oxygen came two
billion years ago we had a lot of
organisms back then but they fermented
there was no oxygen how are they going
to grow and they grow like crazy they
proliferated and then they died when
there was a food source they could grow
like crazy when the food was stopped
they died okay so cancer cell is simply
a shift away from breathing away from
respiration to processes involving
fermentation so I went through and I
showed you that this is the mitochondria
inside of electron microscope because
these organells are very very tiny you
need em electron microscopy to see them
here's the organel broken down into its
various components these little Stripes
that you see here these Stripes They're
called
christe they are the those little
membranes christe contain the proteins
and the lipids that all ow us to breathe
to get energy from oxygen all right we
breathe in and those little that's
electron transport chain in action right
and those little Stripes this is the
mitochondria from AO blastoma mapori a
very deadly human brain tumor you've
heard probably a lot about with Senator
Biden's son and uh others that have had
these horrible tumors and there's a
Crysis you see those little stripes are
missing we call this a ghost
mitochondria the very structures that
are respond responsible for us getting
energy from respiration are missing this
organel is not going to be able to
produce sufficient energy by by
respiration so if that cell that tumor
cell is going to live it has to get an
energy from a different source and that
source is this primitive form of energy
called
fermentation now we I want to go back
and say that we don't know of any cancer
cell that has completely normal numbers
and function and structure of
mitochondria when you look at tissues in
culture you might see a little bit
different but when you look at solid
tissues you usually see that okay so
what we have to do if we're going to
redefine what the nature of cancer is we
just can't ignore all of the other
information that's happened through
Decades of research by the top medical
schools and the top Labs throughout the
world we don't ignore that stuff we just
have to re explain it we just have to
provide an alternative explanation for
what we what we what we have a new way
of looking at the same information the
information is not going to change we
have mutations in the nucleus yes there
are mutations in the nucleus yes these
cells ferment they don't respire yes
they have all of these things so how do
we reconfigure the origin of the disease
in light of a reconfig reanalysis of the
information about the disease so we have
to go back to the hall marks of cancer
like I showed you that the Dogma is
telling us and we have to be able to
re-explain the Dogma in light of an
alternative explanation for what the
disease is and that and that explanation
is mitochondrial metabolic disease but
we have to first deal with the Paradox
the oncogenic paradx has stumbled many
scientists in this field okay so let me
just say for a minute what is this
oncogenic par it was first pointed out
by Albert
sorgi uh who was uh won the Nobel Prize
for his work on vitamin C he said
there's a problem here there's a problem
and it's the Paradox how is it possible
that so many provocative agents that we
know are linked to the origin of cancer
could produce cancer through a common
pathophysiological mechanism okay if you
want to see if any of you have read uh
um sarus muker book The Emperor of all
maladies it was on the New York Times
best s list he won the pulit Sur prize
um Ken Burns uh the famous movie guy he
just produced a film on the Emperor of
all maladies I mean he got a lot of
press a lot of people heard about this
look at page 285 in muker G's book He's
struggling with the oncogenic Paradox on
303 he struggles with the oncogenic
Paradox look it up so he said how is it
possible we know carcinogens carcinogens
in the environment cause cancer
radiation causes cancer hypoxia
inflammation rare mutations Ras oncogene
viruses uh age the older you get the
more likely you get cancer viruses
hepatitis C virus papiloma virus HIV
virus they all cause cancer they all
damage the respiration they all cause
problems they all generate reactive
oxygen species in the organel called the
mitochondria that's supposed to give us
energy okay and then people say what
about the rare what about these people
who get like Angelina Jolene gets bracko
one she has her her breast removed her
ovary and whatever and other people do
these prophylatic responses because they
inherit a gene therefore cancer must be
a genetic disease because the gene
causes it Leaf realm any syndrome
ovarian and brain brain cancer and a
variety of other cancers caused by
inherited mutation in p53 the tumor
suppressor those mutations knock out and
influence the function of this organel
so they're really secondary causes as is
carcinogen radiation and hypoxia all of
them work through the mitochondria and
the Ross reactive oxygen species these
Ross are carcinogenic and mutogenic that
means they cause mutations and they
produce cancer so the Ross come from
damage these things in the environment
or inherit damage the organel this
produces reactive oxygen species these
reactive oxygen species further damage
the organel and they also cause
mutations so now we go back to the the
Dogma the Dogma says cancer is a disease
of somatic mutations where all these
sematic mutations coming from they're
coming from the Ross generated by the
mitochondria so are they the cause of
the cancer or are they the effect of the
cancer which I should say not the cancer
itself but the initiating cause of the
disease because then the disease
progresses now these little organel
signal the nucleus and says we're not
we're not able to get enough uh we can't
breathe basically we're we're
suffocating so the cell has two choices
the cell can either die it can say well
you suffocate you're going to die you
hold your breath long enough you're all
going to die right okay or you can turn
on genes that are going to upregulate
primitive Pathways that existed long
time ago millions of years that were
evolved and you ferment and all cancer
cells then begin to turn on these enogen
and the enogen are transcription factors
to upregulate these primitive energy
Pathways that existed on the planet
before oxygen came in so we're these
cells are are going back to a state that
organisms on the planet existed in a
billion years ago so now they become
free of Regulation so the what was
normally regulating the mitochondria is
now becoming dysfunctional now we can
begin to link the hm marks of the
disease to this linkage scenario as the
cells stop respiring stop breathing they
start fermenting the red line is IND
indicative of fermentation so your cells
that the mitochondria become
progressively damaged because this is an
evolving escalating situation now the
cells enter the default State all of
these first three Hall marks these cells
flip to the way they were before oxygen
which is disregulated cell growth they
proliferate as long as food is there for
fermentation these cells will grow like
crazy then they because cancer looks
like a wound that doesn't heal blood
vessels come in so this is the
angiogenic thing that we spend millions
of dollars billions of dollars trying to
figure out this process here driven by
VF and then we get why the cells
normally when a cell gets sick it dies
is a program cell death apotosis the
cell begins to die from a program
process the very organel that that is
the the the kill switch so to speak this
the very organel that's the kill switch
to get rid of a dead cell or a six cell
is broken the switch doesn't work these
cells are now disregulated and they
continue to proliferate as the result of
this fallback and they're lacking it now
where does metastasis come from because
that's really the thing you can talk
about a lot of what I've already spoken
about happens in benign tumors as well
and yet we spend you can't believe how
many we spend more money studying benign
tumors than we do studying metastatic
disease how do we get
metastasis okay here's the scenario
here's a normal population of cells they
get provoked by one of the by by
something in the environment or or
chemical radiation Virus Infection age
whatever they start to proliferate but
they don't spread they form a lump or a
bump and they continue to grow maybe
very microscopically the cells of our
immune system the macras is that signal
that there's something Disturbed in the
micro environment come in and they come
in as wound healing cells and the wound
doesn't heal because they throw growth
factors out to help heal these wounds
they don't know that these are abnormal
cells so they throw growth factors out
this is all these cells are scripted
they're evolutionary metabolically
scripted they don't think they don't
have minds they do what the environment
tells them to do based on the on the
situation now what happens these cells
are so effective at healing wounds that
if the cell if the the cells they're
trying to heal the wounds don't heal
they actually have are very fusogenic in
some ways they actually fuse with each
other and with other cells say okay I'm
going to actually take care of this by
Fusion now what happens is organel
transfer I said these have damaged
respiration mitochondria gradually as
this festation
continues the the mitochondria inside
these red cells these Macs become
displaced by the mitochondria from the
abnormal cancer cell these
non-metastatic cells and now you have
these cells here these are hybrid Fusion
cells these macrofagos are are they go
through our body they are the Sentinels
of our body they enter in exit tissues
they're programmed to do this if you cut
yourself and bacteria get into the skin
the macres come in Kill the bacteria
heal the wound now we have
disregulated out of control macrofagos
that now they are they enter into
intravasation extrav this is what they
do they're genetic you don't have to
Envision new mutations to do this and
there's number of cancers they can't
find any mutations in these things all
right now the interesting thing here is
these guys are glucose and glutamine
driven okay their behavior is glucose
and glutamine driven that's what they do
so if most cancers Express the warberg
effect as a result of impaired
respiration what thies might be
effective in managing and preventing
tumors now you see once we once once we
have a clear idea of what the nature of
this disease is okay once we now oh my
God it's not a genetic disease despite
the fact that we're spending billions of
dollars in this in this in this failed
effort and the the body count tells you
that um okay now what can we do all
right so these cells are now dependent
heavily on glucose and glutamine so what
we want to do now is we we want to try
to see what we can do one strategy is to
try to reduce levels of fermentable
fuels while elevating levels of
non-fermentable fuels one of the ways we
did this initially was calorie
restriction it's a metabolic cancer
intervent involves a total dietary
restriction differs from starvation
maintains minerals and nutrients and
enhances mitochondrial biogenesis which
is really important because you can
build new mitochondria by by simply
stopping eating um but you got to
realize this is not easy no one I always
said people love to talk about calorie
restriction on a full
stomach believe
me believe me I go around you know even
I talked to the last last week I was out
talking to the calorie restriction
Society of America you know those guys
there you know they they don't eat
anything right they they share a grape
when they have a meeting you know so um
but any event they they're but they're
very hard to do that okay so calorie
restriction in mice mimics water only
therapeutic fasting and you what does
that mean I just drink water you mean I
can't have a snack no snacks just water
all right what about what about a CO no
just water oh geez that's pretty tough
how long do I got to do that can I can I
do that for an hour or two no no no you
got to do it for like a week I don't
that's all that I'm walking the other
way so um but anyway you're going to see
some and we've we've do documented
differences between Mouse and man
because the mouse his heart rate is 600
beats a minute you know if our heart
rate was six on my head would blow off
my body so um so you have to realize
what we see in the mouse oh yeah look at
that Mouse only has to need is 40% less
and look he gets his tumors gone doesn't
work that way in us all right so anyway
when you stop
eating uh blood sugar goes down all
right so your brain needs all this sugar
if your blood if your blood goes down
too far you you fall unconscious you got
to call the EMT gives you uh gives you
chicklet or something makes your sugar
go back up hey what happened so so what
happens is but you see it goes down
gradually it doesn't go down too fast
you stop eating blood sugar goes down
because insulin goes down insulin goes
down because blood sugar goes down your
body says Hey when is this guy then I I
get hungry I got to go back and eat some
stuff I get my the sugar back up again I
feel good all right so but if you don't
go back and get something to eat the
body says okay this guy's not going to
get something to eat if we don't get
something to eat soon we're going to go
unconscious so the brain has to all has
an alternative it burns ketones where do
you get ketones from fat okay we we EV
evolved we're evolving our species you
us we we survived we're Supreme ly
designed to not eat now you put an
organism the human being in an in an
environment this organism we us were
designed to survive for long periods of
time without food because we have an
incredible capacity to store energy what
happens when you take this kind of an
organism and put it in an environment
where all this food is glucose as much
as you can eat wherever you want to go
everywhere on the the store Donuts
pizzas you you get fat right this is
this is what happens now what happens
now you can mobilize that fat if you
stop eating the fat go that you take it
out of your fat goes to the liver the
liver now brings these Ketone bodies and
the Brain begins to burn Ketone bodies
this is how we function when we don't
eat so these water soluble Ketone bodies
are an alternative to glucose and they
can then replace glucose the problem is
the tumor cells can't use these very
well they need a good mitochondria to
burn ketones and the tumor cells don't
have that and here's just a Qui quick
diagram so a brain tumor cell we work
with a lot of gleo blastoma a lot of
brain tumor glucose comes in under
normal conditions the glucose would be
fully oxidized and you'd produce CO2 and
water but the tumor cells don't can't
use the the U they can't fully oxidize
or breathe so they produce a lot of
waste lactic acid is a waste product of
of glucose fermentation creates inity in
the micro environment acidity it causes
inflammation and all this kind of stuff
and the tumor gets so we lower glucose
and we bring in ketones they bypass the
problem is the tumor cells can't use
these Ketone bodies effectively so we're
essentially starving we're metabolically
marginalizing the tumor cells we're
taking away their Prime fuel which is
glucose and we're offering them up an
offering of an alternative fuel that all
the normal cells in our body can burn
effectively because we evolve to do that
but the tumor cell can't because it has
these defective
respiration so here's an example of a
mouse uh this is adaba means this mouse
was allowed to eat all the food that it
wanted it's a high carbohydrate standard
Mouse Chow diet and we just restricted
the amount of calories by 40% 3 days
after tumor cells were implanted into
the brain and we can get anywhere from a
65 to an 85% reduction in the size of
the tumor simply by restricting the
amount of calories that this mouse
ate now we also show each one of these
little squares is a mouse under a
different diet and you can see uh as
gluc ose goes down going from higher to
lower ketones go up this is the
evolutionarily conserved adaptation
happens in the mouse happens in the rat
happens in humans as glucose goes down
the tumor weight goes down since we
published this it's been replicated in
humans for brain cancer and breast
cancer and colon cancer you eat less
sugar the tumors don't grow as fast now
what is the mechanism by which it works
it targets three of the Prime Hallmarks
of cancer it's anti-angiogenic it stops
the blood vessels going into the tumor
it's anti anti-inflammatory and it's
pro-apototic it kills the tumor cells by
a non provocative mechanism it's called
programed cell death each one of these
processes is the subject of
multi-billion dollar Industries building
drugs that can be anti-angiogenic
anti-inflamm bismid avastin is one of
these you know it doesn't work I'm going
to explain that anti-inflammatory drugs
drugs drugs drugs if you stop eating you
get the same effect right nobody tells
you that
now I'm going to go over this this is we
build a model of GBM very powerful model
in in Mouse it's one of the best animal
models if not the best uh and we showed
that if we simply calorie this is a
histological section of the tumor in the
brain you put the cells in they go from
one side of the brain to the other just
like human and you can see when we put
them on the calorie restriction they
they they you can see how demarcated the
tumor is here it's not Demar this dark
blue of the tumor cells they run right
through we can stop slow it down we
don't cure we don't use this term oh we
can cure cancer with calorie restriction
or we can cure cancer with ketogenic
diets wrong okay don't ever say people
the media will say C fre says you can
cure cancer with a ketogenic diet no
that's not true I'm telling you you
don't do that what you can do is you can
slow the system down and make the system
vulnerable to cocktails which will
involve hyperbaric oxygen and a variety
of other drugs so this is one way I'll
talk about that in a little bit so now
the problem is keto restricted ketogenic
diet see problem with calorie
restriction is calorie restriction
nobody likes calorie restriction cancer
patient comes in and then you tell them
you can't eat anymore the guy already
has depression he has all these problems
he's he's he's freaked out by the nature
of disease and now you say go home and
don't eat anything this does it's not
it's not what he wants to hear so we
have to find a way to replicate the
biochemical processes in the body that
calorie restriction will do without
doing full calorie restriction and
that's the ketogenic diet so um
restricted as well so what is this diet
now this is another thing that uh gets
uh wonder what happened to the here we
go ketogenic diets yeah listen to me
they're not all the same okay we've
investigated several commercial and home
preparated prepared Animal Human
whatever all these diets are not the
same so don't anybody think about I'm
going to do a ketogenic diet what are
you going to do the types of fats how do
you know it's going to be different from
an Atkins diet so Atkins diets thank you
okay Atkins diet see ketogenic diets are
very low in carbs very high in fat
moderate protein so Atkins diets have
too much protein people say oh I'm going
to do it they don't know I'm blowing
ketones from a urine stick that must be
I'm in ketosis no you're blowing your
you're blowing ketones in your urine
that doesn't mean you're in in ketosis
you have to measure it in your blood you
have to measure it carefully in your
blood so you have to be very careful
ketogenic diets are not Atkin diets
although Atkin diets can make it make
you appear to have
ketosis so and also it's the type of
fats the type of fats so this is this is
a very sophisticated medical procedure
it's not something to be taken lightly
people have to know about this so when
you get out and hear all these people
I'm on this ketosis that ketosis you got
to be very careful about this we'll give
you the blood meter and you can
determine for yourself quickly um if you
eat too much ketogenic diet your tumors
can grow faster all right so this is
another thing you have to be careful
about people say oh if you eat all this
fat you're going to be very unhealthy
and they're right if you eat too much
fat you get this lipidemia you take your
blood it looks milky it looks milky this
is not healthy when you're on a good
ketogenic diet beautiful Amber HDL LDL
ratio should be beautiful low
triglycerides low blood sugar high
ketones Blood premier it's unbelievable
how healthy your blood work can be if
you do this correctly if you don't do it
cor correctly you put yourself at risk
and you make the tumors grow faster and
this is what we showed the tumors grow
fast on unrestricted ketogenic diets
they grow slow when you restrict the
diet and that's because blood sugar does
doesn't go down and ketones don't go
that high but when you restrict the diet
kdr is restricted look how high the
ketones now we're going to begin to
choke these tumor cells we're starving
them of their fermentable fuel and we're
Force feeding them they can't eat it now
here's the thing can ketogenic be
effective for
patients and what about ketogenic diet
as a as a medicine food is medicine this
is a novel Concept in in in in medicine
today right most medicine is drugs right
Pharmacy what about food is medicine the
ketogenic diet should be respected and
you have to know about it to to use it
correctly this was the first study that
was done by Linda nebling Pioneer give
her a lot of credit for this she rescued
two little children that had um they
were considered hopeless cases at Case
Western Reserve uh they did not respond
well to the chemo and they did not
respond to the surgery nor the radiation
and they finally was able to rescue them
and say I think I can save these kids if
I put them on a ketogenic diet lowered
blood sugar elevated ketones and
provided long-term management to both
quality of life increased dramatically
and survival increased one child lived
several more years than and then passed
away and the other child was lost to
followup okay this I looked at this and
I said what is going on here the thing
that gets me upset is that the first
evidence clear in humans uh was this
study in children in the neuroon
pediatric oncology Ward okay no other
study has yet replicated this in
children we're doing it in adults but
and yet yet I have friends that are
treating the the children next door in
the epilepsy P pediatric epilepsy with
ketogenic diets and children thousands
and thousands of kids are being treated
with ketogenic diet to manage epilepsy
and next in the next
Wing pediatric oncology kids are not
being given a therapy that has been
shown to be very effective why is
that now we published the second paper
uh after Linda from a person who
contacted me from Italy Julio Zoli uh
this into a 65y old woman um she had
Progressive memory loss chronic
headaches and nausea uh she had uh
histology they did a debulking and it
was clear case hystology for GBM and
here you can see the MRI a multicentric
GBM you can't cut it all out this is
this is one of the things with these
gbms you can't cut them out and besides
many of the tumor cells already invade
outside of what you can see and you
can't see that under these MRIs so what
we did is right after debulking surgery
she went on a 3-day water only fast and
then transitioned into a ketogenic diet
right restricted and we got our blood
sugars down a little bit and her ketones
up a little bit so the sugar is black
the this is red the ketones and then her
first MRI and she had standard of care
let me tell you uh but we had po inphy
they call that radiological resolution
they couldn't find the tumor anymore all
right this can happen but it happens
very rarely so there they didn't know
what to say everybody was excited 3
months later she does another one it
looked the same 3 months later another
one so people were thinking man how do
you feel the woman's quality of life was
unbel it was good she was swimming in
the Mediterranean she was feeling very
very good about herself gets off the
diet 10 weeks later the tumor returns
all right rather than going back on the
ketogenic diet and therapeutic fasting
she decided to do a ason bismid right
which was taken off the market for
breast cancer because it was causing
more harm than good
so they gave and we now it's still used
in the United States and Switzerland and
it causes the tumor cells to spread even
worse it it's it's terrible in my book I
blasted it so um yet we still use it
okay um and I can go into that I can do
a discussion but I don't right don't
have time so then I got really upset and
I said you know we did a lot for this
woman and then she went on the avastin
and then she died and I said Jesus what
the hell's going on here so I then I
started looking at what what are we
doing to these cancer patients uh a
brain cancer brain cancer what are we
doing to these people all right you come
in you fall down you have a headache you
have a seizure you have something like
that oh my God you got a GBM or
something like that so the first thing
oh we have to resect immediately so we
debulk we go in right in and we and we
take the tumor out as quickly as we can
and it also depends on the nature of the
patient sometimes you have watchful
waiting sometimes you don't that's the
surgeon's decision but when you debulk a
tumor you create a tremendous amount of
wounding wounding in that place then
soon as the patient recovers a little
bit from the debulking they go under a
very powerful radiation therapy and it's
called radiotherapy and it causes a
tremendous amount of necrosis in and
around where the tumor used to be okay
now often times the brain swells when
you give radiation from all this so they
give high dose steroids to stop the
swelling of the brain this drives the
blood sugar up this makes blood sugars
go high and you create all this necrosis
and this releases glutamine a lot of
glutamine you break these glutamine
glutamate Cycles and you free up these
molecules you increase glutamine I said
glutamine is a powerful driver of tumor
cells and then you you elevate and then
to reduce the swelling you put steroid
and that raises sugar and to make
matters worse all these tumor cells the
majority of them are infected with human
cytomegalo virus very interesting
infections it was only recently found a
few years
ago they are they are like superchargers
for using glucose and glutamine so we
have an infection of the tumor cells and
we freed up massive amounts of the two
fuels that are going to drive their
fermentation we have the standard of
care I published this in at Lance I I
didn't think they would accept it okay
it's a top cancer Journal I was like
shocked when they said we'll publish
your note I said gez I thought I was
going to be shot so so you know you know
what the feel here it is I published
this in
2010 and I said we create The Perfect
Storm we create perfect storm for the
demise of these poor
patients now if you
stick the Beast with a stick don't you
think it should elicit some sort of a
response nothing silence in the entire
on oncology Community nobody said a word
so um now I just said we created the
perfect storm in the way we treat
patients who have gleo blastoma here are
the data
okay the survivors using standard of
care the red are those individuals that
got radiation
alone 278 zero
survivors then we added temis olomide an
alkala agent which was the biggest
breakthrough in brain cancer research
for years and we were able to get
progression free survival a little bit
better this Gap here was considered the
biggest breakthrough in brain cancer
research in 50 years from this alkala
agent and I said wow this is you know
better than just radiation alone but
then a paper came out of UCSF San
Francisco published on top Journal by
John teide increases driver
mutations what how is it possible what
does that mean I said to myself I said
to my students I said what the hell is
going on here okay we're giving a alkala
agent to brain cancer patient and they
are doing better but this m this drug
increases driver mutations isn't that
the the Dogma says if we increase driver
mutations we increase Fitness and growth
speed but yet the patients are doing
better how do you explain that so I was
again provocative I wrote in cancer
letters another top Journal I said what
does temomi do to people all right
fatigue nausea vomiting diarrhea these
are kind of the adverse effects that you
get from temis olomide what all of that
is indirect calorie
restriction I said
it all right
silence now paper just came out from St
the guy this is the protocol he seems to
be able to be the person who says this
is the way you have to do it he just
came out and said we don't think we
should use um steroids any longer to
treat brain cancer patients six years
went by before the before the field
comes out and says now we don't want to
use
steroids all right you shouldn't use any
of
this now I'm going to give you another
case
report influence of metabolic therapy in
an adult female this person contacted me
um out of the blue uh she was a marathon
runner in 09 she had gate disturbance at
56 years of age they misdiagnosed her
for a couple of years then she went in
they did an MRI and she has a tumor
infil uh diffuse infiltrating brain stem
Goma can't operate on this it's in a
part of the brain the brain stem you
can't touch it because it'll die you'll
die so she initiated the restricted
ketogenic diet with supplements
metformin DCA and kumin uh she refused
all recommended chemo and radiotherapy
from five major medical centers both in
France she lives in France and the niece
I visited her last year uh drove us
around took us to to EZ have you ever
been to EZ it's very nice she drove us
there with the brain tumor so um now she
unfortunately she's starting to she this
October she'll be out seven years with
no standard of care she's what we in the
stratosphere of survivors with this kind
of tumor is she doing well reasonably
well she has a little depression she's
just got a wheelchair she's very upset
about it um you know she's not we don't
have the cure for this disease what
we've simply done is slowed it down so
people can live longer and not be so
debilitated then we started to do
testing we started to use her as our as
our test and she said yes I'll be your
guinea pig please take the information
from me so we started to tell okay stop
go on the ketogenic she did she did all
this you see your blood sugar is going
down here in light blue and the ketones
are going up and each one of these
points is every day two or three times a
day for every month for a two-year
period her fingertips are all like all
all you know like a pin cushion you know
but she got us all now I we started
categor categorizing all this
information um then we found out that
how are we going to translate this to
make it easy for people in clinics and
Physicians to work with these people
it's going to be hard she gets in she
she draw she has a handicapped parking
spot right she Park some guy pulls in
takes her handicapped parking spot she
gets freaked out all upset she goes
upstairs measures her blood sugar it's
165 milligrams per decaler she emails me
I'm dying I'm dying my my my I'm back in
Boston College and she's from nce France
telling me and I said what's your
ketones oh they're still pretty high so
I said oh they are so I said to my
students why don't we make a formula why
don't we try to figure out because these
people get I'm telling you right now
Stress Management is extremely important
when you're dealing with cancer patients
because the disease itself causes stress
is an emotional thing there's something
about having a fatal fatality in our
existence that knows that hey we don't
have all the tomorrow that we think
we're going to have that creates stress
stress elevates blood sugar goes up as
the result of that you got to have
Stress Management you're going to do
much better so we decided to do a re
redefine the nature of this glucose
Ketone index calculator publish the
paper in nutrition and Metabolism take
the ratio of blood glucose and Molar and
Ketone and we get the ratio and we think
by meta analysis and our own studies 1.0
or below seems to keep these tumor cells
in a in a lower rate of growth so we
published this and we think this can be
used by the cancer not only brain cancer
all cancers because they're all
basically the same disease they're all
fermenting they need glucose and look at
when we replotted her data see how nice
now the smooth curve so even if she gets
into a fight with the neighbor it's it's
not the the the ketones are keeping that
number down so she doesn't freak out now
here what's going on here ketogenic
diets done correctly are powerful weight
loss therapy this is what people are
using it for both basically right
they're all talking about ketogenic di
you can lose weight you don't eat any
carbohydrates the weight flies off you
you know Trudy to the person told me
says you can never be too rich or too
thin but but she reached the point where
she says you know I need to put on a
little weight so she gets off the diet a
little bit and then she goes back on it
she's she's doing this because you mean
she's she's thin but she's healthy she's
thin but healthy um but anyway it's a
weight loss diet so you have to know how
to balance all these things out the
bottom line is that you got to lower
blood sugar and Elevate ketones to hold
this Beast down it's not going to be as
angry or grow growing as as rapidly if
you can deprive it of its fuels now how
are we going to manage the disease long
term how are we going to call it
resolution okay cancer
resolution what does that mean okay
that's a long-term management okay we
want to keep people alive longer and
healthier than what is currently done is
it
possible to develop a
therapy that will provide long-term
resolution without
toxicity okay that's the key that's the
goal that's our goal okay now we know
that these tumor cells are filled with
mutations The genome projects tell us
that most of the cells in the cancer
have all these
mutations they lack the ability to flip
from one form of energy to another form
of energy because they have all these
genetic defects so if we begin to change
the environment in which they live their
micro environment and their own ability
to grow to grow you need energy you need
something to fuel what fuels their
growth glucose and
glutamine they can't grow without those
molecules because they can't respire
they have to ferment their respiration
is defective so what we do is we deprive
them of their fuels that they use to
ferment and at the same time we force
feed them respiratory fuels in the
presence of
oxygen and we try to blow them up
without harming the other cells in the
environment all the other cells are
burning ketones so they're going over to
this natural fuel that we evolve to use
because they have good mitochondria and
they're healthy the tumor cell is now
they always say he's tough he's fit he's
strong he can res he's res because you
never take away the fermentable fuels
that that cell needs to grow the
therapies that we give cancer patients
make the fuels that that cell use
increases in the environment this is
nuts and the drugs that we use to kill
cancer cells are targeting the nucleus
the nucleus is not the
problem right so what we do is we bring
them into these restricted conditions
called The Press you suppress the growth
you this kills off many tumor cells but
not all of the tumor cells because this
targets glucose but not glutamine and
I've seen raw restricted vegan diets
work also well but it doesn't cure
cancer it slows it down now I have to
admit there are some people whose
cancers respond remarkably well just to
the Press I've seen it but do you get
long-term resolution for everybody's
cancer simply by putting them on a
ketogenic diet or raw vegan diet
no because we don't control the other
fuel which is glutamine non-toxic drug
targeting of glucose and glutamine and
hyperbaric oxygen and hyperbaric oxygen
becomes important because radiation
which is used in a majority in many many
forms of managing cancer kills cancer
cells by increasing Ross R but it's
indiscriminate killing it kills the
tumor cell it kills the neighbor it
kills a lot of other things and it
creates necrosis and frees up glutamine
we don't want that hyperbaric oxygen can
do the same thing without harming the
normal cells as long as you can deprive
the tumor cell of its fermentable fuels
then it becomes susceptible to Ross
created by hyperbaric oxygen which is
much less harmful to the body than is
radiation now exercise is an important
component but we don't yet know how to
balance the exercise issue in with these
other processes this is called the
cocktail the cocktail is going to
involved the press and a series of
pulses that are going to be delivered to
people over a series of time and we
would like to make this time the same
time frame that you would go if you had
standard of care so they give you a
whole routine of radiation they give a
whole bunch of chemo you come back for
this and that we think we can build a
cocktail that will have the same
therapeutic benefits to resolve the
disease make people live longer and
quality of life go up because you're not
making these people sick you're
essentially making them healthy the only
thing you're making sick is the tumor
cell the normal cells are getting
healthier and healthier so this is the
strategy and we just you know have a
preliminary results this is using 2
deoxy glucose it's a glucose inhibitor
with the ketogenic diet the D the drug
has no effect in very low dose the diet
has an effect you diet and Drug you got
Synergy this proving that we can get
Synergy by using diet and drug and then
of course Dominic the austino my
colleague was here last last time and he
presented this from Angela poof we all
work together on this the we we gener we
labeled the tumor cells bioluminescent
labeling so we can follow their
metastasis through the whole body
beautiful model excellent model for
systemic metastasis which is the killer
of most people hyperbaric oxygen by
itself well not much uh ketogenic diet
by itself yes a little bit Yeah but this
wasn't restricted got it wasn't
restricted if you restrict it you get
much better results and then of course
if you put the two together you get
Synergy and this is the way this is
press pulse so in this particular case
it's the it's the diet with hyperbaric
oxygen also you have to realize 25% of
people that die from cancer get
metastasis to the brain lung to brain
breast to brain kidney to brain so brain
becomes a big problem so this Mouse has
a very bright body very purple and of
course the brain is is is it came from
the uh it came from the viscera to the
brain this mouse has the same bright not
as bright of course but the brain was
significantly reduced in in cells that
entered the brain this is just a diet
we're working on new formulation this
another thing the form we have so much
to do in this field it's unbelievable we
can tweak these lipids and we can make
these proteins different every one of
them designed to stress out these tumor
cells while making the normal cells
healthy it's just a world of
unbelievable new stuff that could come
down if people were interested in it
can't get these people out of this Dogma
it's
unbelievable now this is a concept slide
that I only the
biochemists would
uh see to for a cancer cell to
grow you got to make you got to make
protein you got to make fat and you got
to make nucleic acids you got to make
that otherwise you can't grow cancer you
have to rebuild everything glucose and
glutamine are the fuels to build the
Machinery to build the nucleic acids the
fats and the proteins the cell is blown
out so it has to use these primitive
forms of energy so if you shut these
down and give them hyperbaric oxygen
you're going to blow the sucker up he's
not going to be able to protect himself
the very these cancer cells have
powerful
antioxidants they present they they are
very but they're on the edge of Life
they're this far from death but they
have a very powerful antioxidant system
made from glucose and glutamine if we
take away that their Shield of
protection evaporates and we starve them
and we put the oxygen in there we blow
them up not and we make it so it's
non-toxic to the rest of the
body now I just want to end with this
one slide somebody asked me what about
the dogs okay I think the the the the
segue into the human is going to come
through the canine okay so this woman
contacted me uh from Georgia with her
dog has a giant mass cell tumor right
under the nose um she goes to the vet
the vet says we're going to surgically
resect the tumor we're going to give the
dog radiation and chemo what what else
is new uh the dog might live six or
months going to be sick uh you have to
realize that she said no uh she said I'm
going to she I couldn't believe she just
looked at my YouTube videos and read the
papers a lay person that has no she went
to the butcher she got uh organic
chicken meat with the bone still in it
uh medium chain triglyceride oil little
fish oil and a raw egg and said okay
this dog weighs this much it's a working
dog it should have uh 1,800 calories a
day or something I'm going to cut it by
40% and give the dog two meals a day of
a restricted amount of food the dog lost
five pounds in this treatment but look
at this it went it's July 2013 September
this giant tumor went to that spot now
here in 2014 it went here in January
2015 the dog has just this tiny little
little little Freckle right there um the
door I called her up this a couple of
weeks ago how's Minka doing oh minka's
doing fine so now the guys from Quest
Nutrition saw this stuff and they built
this keto pet sanctuary in the middle of
the Texas desert and they put in vets
and MRIs for dogs hyperbaric chambers
for dogs ketogenic diets for dogs and
they presented the work at the meeting
we went to in Tampa and they were able
to resolve cancer in 12 out of 15 dogs
just using metabolic therapy and they're
going to publish it they got a bunch
Physicians and scientists that are
working on this and I say can you
imagine if this stuff gets out into the
literature why are we curing all these
damn dogs of cancer and we're all being
nuked and
poisoned does that make
sense anyway to conclude uh cancer is
more of a mitochondrial metabolic
disease than it is a nuclear disease I
hope I was able to convince you or at
least open your mind to that preclinical
and case report studies indicate that
the restricted diets can be effective
non-toxic press therapy for managing
malignant cancers in children and
patients adults effective pulse
therapies can include oxygen glucose
glutamine targeting and a whole variety
of other things that we have just begun
to look at the glucose Ketone index is
simply a monitor that allows patients to
feel good about themselves and at least
to say I'm fighting this disease with my
own capabilities I'm not relying on the
pharmaceutical industry to tell me how
I'm supposed to fight my my
disease now I've worked with a lot of
Physicians and scientists on
this um from all over the place I've
been funded by uh private foundations
and I want to mention the single cause
single cure foundation and if you guys I
don't take money if you want to give
money to this this is one of the few
foundations that actually is interested
in trying to manage cancer using
metabolic therapies they're not so
interested in the mechanism they want to
see results is it possible to to do what
I just said build cocktails tails
that are non-toxic that kill tumor cells
while making the rest of the body
healthy so they're interested in
hyperbaric oxygen non-toxic drug
targeting and see if we can fact resolve
these diseases because we're going to
move it right I have a number of
Physicians that want to move this right
into the patient population if it works
in these preclinical models because we
don't want to be treating these mice and
having them die and suffer just like
humans are dying and suffering so if I
can keep these mice alive with
metastatic cancer and gleo blastoma for
a significant period of time and they
look pretty good and they're not dying
then I'm going to tell my friends in the
clinics why don't you try this on your
patients so thank you very much for your
attention
[Applause]